Contributing¶
Conversations about development and issues take place in the GitHub repository. If you are looking to make a contribution, please make sure to discuss the change first in a GitHub issue. This helps us scope the contribution before you commit many hours of work to it. Feel free to open a new issue if no appropriate issue already exists!

Setting up a local installation¶
Make sure you have a reasonably modern C++ compiler. Any recent version that supports (most of) the C++20 standard should do. Once you have a compiler installed, you can proceed by forking the PyVRP repository from the GitHub website. Then, clone your new fork to some local environment:


git clone https://github.com/<your username>/PyVRP.git
Now, change into the PyVRP directory, and set-up the virtual environment using :uv


cd PyVRP
uv sync
Syncing might take a little while, but only needs to be done once. Now make sure everything runs smoothly, by executing the test suite:


uv run pytest
Note

If you use pre-commit, you can use our pre-commit configuration file to set that up too. Simply type:


pre-commit install
After this completes, style and typing issues are automatically checked whenever you make a new commit to your feature branch.

Setting up Github Codespaces¶
If you are having trouble building PyVRP from source or setting up your local development environment, you can try to build PyVRP online, using GitHub Codespaces. Github Codespaces allows you to create a development environment directly in your browser.

To launch Github Codespaces, go to the PyVRP repository and click on the green button. Select the Codespaces tab and click on the + icon to create a Codespaces environment. This environment is configured with all necessary dependencies to build PyVRP. Once the setup completes, execute the test suite to verify everything runs smoothly:


uv run pytest
Building the extensions¶
PyVRP uses a number of native Python extensions that are written in C++ for performance. These extensions are built every time is used, but that command builds everything in release mode. While developing, one typically wants to use debug builds. Now that the virtual environment has been prepared, these (and more) can be made by using the script directly, as follows:uv syncbuildtools/build_extensions.py


uv run buildtools/build_extensions.py
The script takes a number of command-line arguments, which you can discover using


uv run buildtools/build_extensions.py --help
We use the Meson build system to compile the C++ extensions. Meson is configured using the file in the repository root. You should not have to touch this file often: all compilation is handled via the script.meson.buildbuildtools/build_extensions.py

Debugging the extensions¶
This section explains how to perform cross-debugging for mixed Python and C++ code. We will use the Visual Studio Code IDE and the Python C++ Debug extension.

First, build PyVRP in debug mode:


uv run buildtools/build_extensions.py --build_type debug
Create a test Python file that calls some C++ code, like so:


from pyvrp import Client

Client(x=0, y=0)
Set breakpoints in within the constructor. Next, set-up your debugger configuration by creating the file, with the following content:pyvrp/cpp/ProblemData.cppClient.vscode/launch.json


{
    "version": "0.2.0",
    "configurations": [
        {
            "name": "Python C++ Debugger",
            "type": "pythoncpp",
            "request": "launch",
            "pythonConfig": "default",
            "cppConfig": "default (gdb) Attach"
        }
    ]
}
Start the debugger in Visual Studio Code and step through the code. The debugger should break at the breakpoints that you set in .pvvrp/cpp/ProblemData.cpp

Profiling the extensions¶
Typically, the most computationally intense components in PyVRP are written in C++, as native extensions. While developing new functionality that touches the C++ components, it is important to pay attention to performance. For this, profiling is an incredibly useful tool. There are many ways to get started with profiling, but the following may be helpful.

First, build a debug optimised build of PyVRP, as follows:


uv run buildtools/build_extensions.py --build_type debugoptimized
This ensures all debug symbols are retained, so the profiling output contains meaningful information. Next, we need to use a profiling tool, which varies based on your operating system.


Linux
macOS
Make sure you install , the Linux profiling tool. Now, all we need to do is let record PyVRP doing some work, like for example:perfperf


uv run perf record pyvrp instances/VRPTW/RC2_10_5.vrp --seed 6 --round_func dimacs --max_runtime 5
The resulting file will contain all relevant profiling results. Such a file can be inspected using on the command line, or with a GUI using, for example, KDAB’s hotspot program.perf.dataperf


Committing changes¶
We use pull requests to develop PyVRP. For a pull request to be accepted, you must meet the below requirements. This greatly reduces the job of maintaining and releasing the software.

One branch. One feature. Branches are cheap and GitHub makes it easy to merge and delete branches with a few clicks. Avoid the temptation to lump in a bunch of unrelated changes when working on a feature, if possible. This helps us keep track of what has changed when preparing a release.

Commit messages should be clear and concise. This means a subject line of less than 80 characters, and, if necessary, a blank line followed by a commit message body.

Code submissions should always include tests.

Each function, class, method, and attribute needs to be documented using docstrings. We conform to the NumPy docstring standard.

If you are adding new functionality, you need to add it to the documentation by editing (or creating) the appropriate file in .docs/source/

Make sure your documentation changes parse correctly. See the documentation in the directory for details on how to build the documentation locally.docs/

Note

Please use the “Pull request” template on GitHub when opening a pull request.

Licensing¶
PyVRP is licensed under the MIT license. All code, documentation and other files added to PyVRP by contributors is licensed under this license, unless another license is explicitly specified in the source file. For your contribution, please check that it can be included into PyVRP under the MIT license. If you did not write the code yourself, you must ensure that the existing license is compatible and include the license information in the contributed files, or obtain permission from the original author to relicense the contributed code. Contributors keep the copyright for code they wrote and submit for inclusion to PyVRP.